Introduction
The attainment of independence for India was no isolated event but had sparked off a new process of decolonisation all over the world. The leaders of young India now faced the tremendous challenge of overcoming the colonial legacy of widespread poverty and disease, near total illiteracy and socio-economic underdevelopment. Centuries of backwardness had to be overcome, promises of freedom were to be kept, a nation was to be built. Thus, in this part, we shall learn about some of the post-independence challenges that Indian leaders faced, as well as methods adopted to tackle them. The Challenges First and foremost, there was the need to strengthen India's unity, particularly in view of India's size and diversity. India's immense regional, religious, linguistic, ethnic and tribal diversities had to be recognised and accepted. The different parts of the country and different sections of people had to be given their due space in the Indian Union. India's faith in secularism had to be strengthened, undaunted by the partition and accompanying violence. India's freedom had to be taken beyond the realm of politics and into the realm of society and economy. For this to be achieved, India had to ensure that the society and economy of the nation do not ever again fall under the domination of a section of people. This called for active role of the state in the society and economy, planning and a large public sector to put India firmly on the path of economic growth with distributive justice. Economic independence also meant self-reliance in food and industry. Thus, the foundation for modern agriculture and industries had to be laid along scientific lines. On the eve of independence, India was far from a free society. Male domination was near total, caste system and untouchability dominated the rural society. Illiteracy was widespread (only 25% men and 7.9% women were literate in 1951). In hindsight, the leaders of free India demonstrated enormous courage and vision when they decided to do two things: one, to build a democratic state among an illiterate people and two, to undertake economic development within a democratic state. Henceforth, India embarked upon the extremely challenging task of resolving all issues within the framework of democracy. The leaders of young India not only repeatedly rejected the 'rice-bowl theory' (that the poor were more interested in a bowl of rice than democracy), they remained committed to strengthening democratic consciousness among the people. Perhaps, this is the reason why India not only managed to retain democracy, in a continent where democracy beyond the trappings of elections hasn't fared very well, but also managed to consolidate its democratic system. And it is due to its democratic system that a vast and diverse country like India has managed to consolidate itself increasingly as a nation state, overtime. The Doubts However, this has not been easy. Many doubts were cast on India's ability to sustain its developmental design. Many critics, both foreign and Indian, predicted that the Indian Union would collapse into linguistic and ethnic fragments; that India's developmental efforts would drown under the weight of its multiple socio-economic problems; and that India would ultimately end up being ruled by a civilian or military authoritarian regime. The left-wing sceptics held that political democracy, economic development, national unity, etc. were all shams aimed at deluding the oppressed classes. They therefore predicted a peasant-based revolution in India on the lines of Russia and China. It was also argued that the Green Revolution would soon turn Red as it benefitted only the big farmers while pushed small and marginal farmers into poverty and migration. In short, by 1960s, doubting India's democracy and development became the norm rather than exception. And as India continued to survive despite failures on many fronts, the observers felt perplexed, failing to realise that the foundation of India was laid not in 1947 but nearly a hundred years before that by the leaders of the freedom struggle, and they had laid the foundation well and deep. The Leaders There is no denying that a great deal depends on the personal qualities of the political leaders. During the early phase of independence, India was fortunate to have leaders whose leadership skills had been immensely honed on account of their participation in the freedom struggle. They had acquired the capacity to deal with diverse interests within a democratic framework and enjoyed a pan-India appeal. Afterwards, however, a scarcity of dedicated leaders has been felt and emergence of politics of class, caste, region and opportunism has severely affected the pace of national development. True, India has not progressed at a pace first envisaged by our national leaders, but it has made considerable gains and justifies our hope and confidence in the future of the nation. After all, had not Gandhiji predicted on the eve of independence that, 'with the end of slavery and the dawn of freedom, all the weaknesses of society are bound to come to the surface. There is, however, no reason to be unnecessarily upset about it. If we keep our balance at such a time, every tangle will be solved'. 
WHAT IS MEANT BY SUBALTERN STUDIES? The term subaltern comes from Latin roots 'sub' meaning below and I 'alternus' meaning all others and is used to describe someone lower in status or rank. The term is also used to describe someone who has no political or economic power, such as a person living under colonial rule. The term was adopted by Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci to refer to those groups in society who are subject to the hegemony of the ruling classes. Subaltern Perspective is also one of the various perspectives from which history is studied. It simply refers to studying history from point of view of the oppressed and the exploited, or simply, the study of history from below. The Subaltern Studies Group (SSG) is a group of South Asian historians who aimed to promote a systematic discussion of subaltern themes in South Asian Studies. The group was initially formed by Ranajit Guha (also known as the father of subaltern studies) in the 1980s and included scholars such as Shahid Amin and Partha Chatterjee. According to Guha, the term in 'Subaltern Studies' refers to the general attribute of subordination in South Asian society whether this is expressed in terms of class, caste, age, gender and office or in any other way'. The SSG arose to redress the imbalance created in academic work by a tendency to focus on elites and elite culture in South Asian historiography and to attempt to formulate a new narrative of the history of India and South Asia as told from the point of view of the colonised rather than that of the colonisers. For instance, with respect to India, Guha asserts that the historiography of Indian nationalism, had long been dominated by elitism and naturally suffered from an elitist bias. Such writing, he asserts cannot acknowledge the contribution made by the people and thus needs to be studied separately. For the subaltern historians, the basic contradiction in Indian society during the colonial period was between the elite (both Indian and foreign) on the one hand and between the subaltern groups, on the other. They believe that the Indian national movement was essentially a farce and represented a struggle for power colonialist elitism and bourgeois-nationalist - among the elites. In Post-colonial Studies, the term 'subaltern' (taken from the work of the SSG) refers to the study of post-colonial societies from a subaltern perspective. India on the Eve of Independence (Legacy of the British Rule and the National Movement) O Legacy of the British Rule > Polity > Law and Administration > Education > Society > Economy O Legacy of the National Movement > Faith in the Capacity of the Masses > Principles of Non-Violence and Non-Aggression > Civil Libertarian and Democratic Ideals > Right to Dissent and Right to Minority Opinion > Self-Reliant Development with Equality and Justice > Commitment to Egalitarian Society > Faith in Secularism > Vision of a United India > Internationalism and Independent Foreign Policy > High norms of Politics and Political Behavior > Capacity to Change with Changing Times LEGACY OF THE BRITISH RULE The debate over the impact and legacy of British rule in India began in the second half of the 19th century and continues till date. Alter 1857, economic exploitation of India continued and even intensified in many ways. The rising Indian intelligentsia threw up the early national leaders (the Moderates) who were the first to develop an economic critique of the colonial rule. The early Indian nationalists like Dadabhai Naoroji, R.C. Dutt and D.E. Wacha began the task of assessing the merits and demerits of British rule in India and developed the thesis that England was exploiting India and draining away its wealth (the economic critique later emerged as the single most significant factor that contributed to the rise of the Indian National Movement in the second half of the 19th century). To counter this nationalist viewpoint, several British administrator-historians gave the thesis of 'paternalism and trusteeship' and insisted on the 'civilising mission' of the British in India. During the First World War and the rising tide of nationalism and anti-colonialism all over the world, some of them began to admit the 'the inherent reasonableness of India's claim to manage her own affairs'. After1947, however, there has been an attempt to strike a balance between the constructive and destructive role of the British in India. For instance, British rule has been held responsible for provoking India into modern politics and enthusing its people with a sense of purpose and unity against the foreign rule. Philips Mason has interestingly depicted the Anglo-Indian association as a forced marriage between the masculine John Bull and the docile Indian girl, ending in a divorce in August 1947. Now, both parties have decided to bury the past and are looking forward to a relationship on equal terms! Clearly, there is a bit of truth in both the arguments. The character of the colonial rule was quite paradoxical, and hence, its impact and legacy were bound to be paradoxical as well, which may be summarised under the following heads- Polity Perhaps the most significant legacy of the British rule was the political and administrative unification of India under one centralised government. Extensive territories from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin and from Chittagong to Khyber Pass were brought under the British, directly or indirectly, creating a larger Indian Empire than even the Mauryas or the Mughals! The political and administrative necessities also compelled the British to put in place uniform administrative and judicial set up for the whole of India. Driven by the need for imperial defence and fuller exploitation of Indian resources, the British began development of modern means of transport and communication. A country-wide network of roads and railways, post and telegraph systems was set up. The British also evolved a common educational system which in time gave rise to an India-wide intelligentsia that shared a common outlook on polity and society and thought in pan-India terms. All these developments gave India an appearance of unity and contributed to the first stirrings of national consciousness. However, the colonial legacy with regard to the political unity of India was marked with a strange paradox. The British soon began to fear the unity of the Indian people and adopted the policy of "divide and rule' or of "counterpoises'. They tried to capitalise on the already existing fault lines of caste, class, region and religion and sowed the seeds of communalism, culminating in India's partition. Indian bureaucrats, specially the ICS officers formed a rigid and exclusive caste; their narrow outlook became a major obstacle.in the radical socio-economic and political change that was sought after independence. The spread of English education in India also came with its own divisive effects. While it resulted in the spread of modern ideas of democracy and nationalism, the emphasis on English and high fees for schools and colleges made education a virtual monopoly of the rich, creating a gulf between the educated and- the masses which has persisted to haunt India even today. Another paradox of the colonial state was that it introduced in India a parliamentary system of government but continued to retain the reigns of state power. Constitutional concessions were regularly offered from time to time in the form of various Council of India Acts and the Government of India Acts, but the real power remained accumulated in the hands of the British Governor General. The franchise remained extremely narrow, the legislatures unrepresentative. Thus, on the eve of Independence, what India inherited was merely 'despotism in a constitutional garb' and establishment of true democracy continues to remain a challenge. For instance, even after 70 years of independence, country's politics remains dominated by the Nehru-Gandhi family in many ways. Law and Administration The paradoxical nature of the colonial state was also visible in its law and administration. While basically authoritarian and autocratic, it introduced certain liberal elements as well like the rule of law and civil liberties. The British deserve the credit for introducing in India the modern concept of rule of law, which meant that administration was to be carried out as per the formulated laws and not according to the whims and fancies of any ruler. Yet, the laws were often repressive and police and the civil servants continued to exercise a great deal of extra-legal powers! Civil liberties like freedom of press, speech and association extended in normal times were drastically curtailed in the periods of freedom struggle. The concept of equality before law also fell short of its promise. Court procedures were often quite expensive, denying the common man affordable justice and created a 'legal divide' in society. Though a relatively independent judiciary was set up, it also ultimately served the interests of the ruling class often at the cost of true justice to the common people. The government of free-India continues to struggle with the various shortcomings of the judicial system. Similarly, the much-praised Indian Civil Service is not without its drawbacks. The ICS was created as a close preserve of the Europeans to rule India with iron- hands. The liberal salaries and allowances and lavish pension paid to these officers was criticised as a big drain on India's resources. Dadabhai Naoroji even denounced the ICS as 'leeches' that sucked India's blood. But even after independence, the IAS has largely remained a 'cult' and as put by Rabindranath Tagore, 'untouched by hand', i.e., insensitive to the feelings of the people and out-of-synch with the new socio-political currents. Even today, Indian bureaucracy continues to be accused of several bureau-pathologies including presence of imperial mindset and lack of service attitude. Education The spread of English education in India came with its own merits and demerits. In 1835, the British inaugurated the system of English education in India with the intention of creating a loyal class of English educated Indians who could carry out clerical tasks. According to Macaulay, the idea was to form "a class of persons, Indian in blood and color, but English in taste, in opinions, in morals and in intellect." However, the English system of education opened to the Indians the floodgates of European liberal thought. It familiarised the Indians with the modern European ideas of equality, liberty, nationalism and democracy. Some of them visited England for higher education. There they saw first-hand the life of people in a free country. Thus, realising the hypocrisy of the British in India, this educated Indian middle class itself took on the leadership of the Indian national movement. Moreover, English itself became the lingua franca of the Indian nationalists. In the absence of such a common language, it would have been very difficult for the nationalists to organise a movement of all India character. However, the reality was that neither the Company nor the Crown was really interested in promoting any kind of learning in India. It may be aptly stated that the emergence of both, the Indian Renaissance as well as the Indian National Movement, were as much a result of British education policies as a reaction to it. Changes in education system were made to promote British interests such as supply of clerks, creation of market for British goods and justify the colonial rule. Thus, the colonial education system promoted learning by rote and the rational and critical faculties of the students remained underdeveloped. A meagre sum was allocated for promotion of learning activities. This sum was spent in the establishment of a handful of English schools and colleges at the cost of mass education with the net effect that literacy was hardly better in 1921 than in 1821. Emphasis on English also prevented fuller development of Indian languages and high fees for schools and colleges made education a virtual monopoly of the rich, limiting the spread of education to an elite class. The filtration theory did not work in practice and instead created a linguistic and cultural divide between the educated few and the illiterate masses. Scientific and technical education and women's education was also neglected as it lacked usefulness in the eyes of the British. The neglect of technical education gave rise to the phenomenon of educated unemployed. Many of these drawbacks of the colonial education system still pervade Indian schools and colleges. Society Social and religious institutions were an area in which the British intervened with great caution. The interventions came after much procrastination and adequate pragmatic political consideration. It was also seen that the impact of most of the legislative interventions was limited and did not evoke any violent Indian response. All the same, even this policy of limited social intervention was abandoned by the colonial government in the wake of the Revolt of 1857 and replaced by support to orthodox elements of society. In the field of Indian cultural life, however, the western impact was all-pervading and greatly influenced Indian art, architecture, literature and painting. By the time the British left, western way of life had made deep inroads into Indian society and culture affecting outlook, food habits, fashion, etc. Economy The British had conquered India driven by commercial and economic gains and naturally the British impact in economic sphere was the most disastrous and devastating. The rise of British supremacy Ied to the subordination of Indian economy as per the needs and interests of the British rulers whose main interests lay in exploitation of Indian resources and enrichment of their own people at the cost of Indian people. British economic policies such as new land revenue policies, discriminatory trade restrictions, domination of markets and continuous conquests had an adverse impact on almost all classes of Indian people from peasants and artisans upto the ruling class. The British policies brought about a ruin of Indian agriculture, trade and industry and resulted in a complete breakdown of the traditional economic structure. The self-sufficiency of the villages was destroyed and Indian economy was rapidly transformed into a colonial economy. Once transformed, the colonial economy's main role was to serve the interests of Britain. As such, an arbitrary international division of labour was forced upon India and it was converted into a producer of raw materials to feed the ever hungry British industries. Thus, India's economy was integrated with the world economy, though in a subservient position. Further, the Indian masses wailed under the weight of a highly inequitable tax structure - with peasants paying the highest taxes in the form of land revenue while the upper-income groups such as bureaucrats, landlords and merchants hardly paid any taxes (in 1900-01, land revenue and salt tax formed 53% and 16% of the total revenue of the government, respectively). Additionally, a major part of the revenue or social surplus appropriated by the state was spent, not in improving agriculture or the lot of the taxpayers, but in meeting the needs of the colonial state and in payments of tribute to Britain. Such 'drain of wealth' clearly resulted in steady impoverishment of the Indian masses, sapped India of essential resources and put limits on the extent of future development. Under the British, agriculture came to be dominated by the colonial state, landlords, merchants and money lenders. It became infested with problems of heavy taxation, technical backwardness, extremely low investment in agriculture, low yields per acre, subinfeudation, evictions, fragmentation of land holdings, forced labour, tenancy, usury, etc. that rendered the profession financially unviable. Consequently, by the time the British left India, "one of the granaries of Asia had been converted into a land of perpetual scarcity and famine'. Indian industry met a similar fate - low production technology, lopsided regional development, poor work conditions, stranglehold of British finance capital and ruin of handicraft industry in the face of competition from cheaper, machine-made goods imported from Britain. Driven by the need to preserve India as the 'agricultural farm of industrialised Britain', the British economic policies resulted in a steady de- industrialisation of India. Though certain modern industries did develop in the second half of the 19th century, their development was grossly inadequate both in terms of production and employment. India severely lagged behind in the development of basic industries such as capital goods, machine tools, electric power, coal, iron and steel, locomotives, banking and insurance. Driven by the need for imperial defence from both external and internal threats and fuller exploitation of Indian resources, the British also initiated the development of means of transport and communication, built roads and railways. However, the impact of railway development in India was negative in many ways. Unlike in Britain and the US, railways did not boost steel and machine industries in India (the railway companies imported almost all they needed); the railway freight rates were also so fixed as to favor export-import and discriminate against movement of India-made goods. Though severely limited, the rise of modern industries under the British did provide the material basis for the subsequent emergence of modern industry in India. An important social consequence of this limited industrial development was the emergence of the Indian industrial capitalist class and the working class. Even as these classes formed a miniscule part of the Indian population, they represented new technology, new social relations and new outlook with the consequence that their economic and political contribution in 19th and 20th centuries far outweighed their numbers. Further, by 1947, the Indian capital had also made a great deal of headway in large-scale industrial sector (60% of units), small-scale industrial sector (almost wholly based on Indian capital), bulk of internal trade as well as banking and insurance. However, it must be recalled that the development of Indian industry and capital was severely limited and occurred not because of, but in spite of, colonialism and after a prolonged politico-economic struggle. The net impact of British economic policies in India was widespread poverty, destitution, disease and malnutrition culminating in a series of major and minor famines that run like a thread throughout India's colonial period. Underdevelopment was also reflected by other dimensions such as stagnating per capita income, high level of illiteracy (84% total, 92% among women), high annual death rate (25 per 1,000 persons), high infant mortality rate (175-190 per 1,000 live births), low life expectancy (32 years in 1951) and spread of epidemics like plague, small pox and malaria that wiped out several thousands of people every year. Supply of water and electricity, services of health and sanitation were highly compromised or non- existent. The misery of Indian masses was further accentuated by the prevalence of extreme inequality in income, wealth and opportunity. Clearly, the British rulers left behind a legacy of widespread underdevelopment and poverty, the responsibility of which lies squarely on the shoulders of British imperialist rulers. The prolonged colonial exploitation has weighed heavily on India's development trajectory since independence. Hence, in 1947, India emerged as a free nation but with the tremendous baggage of two hundred years of colonial past. The British rule had brought about wide- ranging changes in Indian economy, polity and society - many of them have aptly been described as 'development of underdevelopment' and left behind a legacy of difficulties. They left behind a colonial economy, colonial polity, colonial society and even colonial outlook and above all, the ever present danger of neo-colonialism lurking all around. It was estimated that 10.3 million people starved to death during the 1876-1879 period, most of which were in South India (the tragedy is also referred to as the Madras famine). British colonial rule argued that famine relief would be an inappropriate response and encourage laziness. Some officials argued that according to the Thomas R. Malthus theory, famines are a nature's way for population con- trol and argued that the British government should not intervene. British government continued its policy of "forced export" of food from India in during this time. The poverty, misery and diseases wiped out villages and families. Some farmers and their families committed suicide suffering this trauma and extended period of starvation. Parents killed themselves so that their children could eat the remaining scraps of food, creating a pool of abandoned and forsaken children. Fig. 1.1 1876-1879 Famine in India under British Colonial Rule. 
LEGACY OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT While India inherited colonial economy and administrative structures from the British Raj; it inherited values, ideals and vision from the national movement. These values and ideals were neither a part of India's tradition, nor a legacy of the colonial rule, but consciously cherished by the national leaders and deeply ingrained by the national movement. Faith in the Capacity of the Masses In the field of politics, the Indian National Movement was perhaps the greatest mass movement in world history. Specially after the emergence of Fig. 1.2 "My nationalism, fierce Mahatma Gandhi in 1919, the movement acquired a distinct ideological orientation. Gandhi was of the view that freedom for India could come only with the active, participation of the masses. He based the freedom struggle on the basic premise that the masses are the subjects and not objects of politics. Hence, Gandhi tried to bridge the gap between the leaders and the led. He was responsible for making the Congress Party more democratic and brought it closer to the masses. The bedrock of his politics was his immense faith in the capacity of the masses, their courage and moral strength. It was because of this ideological legacy of the national movement that the leaders of independent India unhesitatingly put faith in the capacity of the masses and introduced popular sovereignty and universal adult franchise in a largely poor and illiterate society. though it is, is not exclusive, is not devised to harm any nation or individual." -Mahatma Gandhi Principles of Non-Violence and Non-Aggression Satyagraha and non-violence were the other chief aspects of Gandhian ideology. Though the principle of returning good for evil is not new and has been practiced by many thinkers and preachers including Buddha and Christ, Gandhi's contribution lies in the fact that he brought satyagraha out from merely personal life to larger public life. He made satyagraha a tool for social, political and economic problems which was a truly original and novel contribution. The principles of non-violence and non-aggression created the much needed temper for democracy and formed the bedrock of all the internal as well as external relations of free India. Civil Libertarian and Democratic Ideals Similarly, the leaders of the national movement were from the very beginning committed to the ideals of democracy and advocated full range of civil liberties for the individuals. Throughout the movement, the nationalists struggled for the freedom of speech and press, freedom to form associations and agitate peacefully. In 1937, when Congress Ministries were formed, civil liberties were promptly extended to the various sections of society including the peasants, workers, students as well as to the radical socialists and communist parties. The national movement not only provided the much needed experience but also the will to put in place a liberal democratic state in free India. A legacy of the national movement, the ideal naturally found a firm place in the Indian Constitution. Right to Dissent and Right to Minority Opinion The chief vehicle of the national movement, i.e., the Indian National Congress itself was an umbrella organisation, representing a cross-section of views and opinions. Hence it did not believe in uniformity of views but instead firmly believed in right to dissent, freedom of expression and decision by consensus; minority views were encouraged to be openly held and freely expressed. Policies and resolutions were richly debated before being voted upon. Along with the INC, most other political organisations of the time functioned along similar lines with the result that, by 1947, culture of tolerance and respect for dissent and for minority opinion had-already deep in roads into Indian mindset. This is also the reason why multi-party democracy and civil liberties have fared differently in India and-Pakistan. Self-Reliant Development with Equality and Justice The nationalist economists also developed a comprehensive economic critique of the colonial rule. G.V. Joshi, D.E. Wacha, G. Subramaniya lyer, G.K. 6okhale, Prithwis Chandra Ray and several other political activists gave their own analysis of the economic impact of colonial rule and subjected the entire range of colonial policies to minute scrutiny. Eventually all their efforts converged at one point and found the British rule at the vortex of India's underdevelopment. They were able to see that India's poverty was not inherent or natural but very much man-made (or rather British-made) and removable and made this economic critique as the main plank of their nationalist economic agitation. The early nationalists showed trade, industry and finance as the three pillars of economic domination. They highlighted that economic exploitation of India was no longer carried out by the crude tools of plunder and tribute but through more sophisticated modern phenomenon of 'free trade'. Of particular concern to them was the decline of Indian traditional handicraft industry. They looked upon foreign capital as disguised evil and were unanimous on the view that India's future economic development should be based on Indian capital and not foreign capital. Further, the early economists highlighted that developmental and welfare departments were starved at the cost of those departments that fulfilled British needs such as defence. On the basis of the above critique, the nationalists developed a broad economic strategy to combat India's economic underdevelopment. They envisaged self- reliant economic development for India based on indigenous capital; protection and encouragement to domestic industries; and restricted entry of foreign goods and foreign capital. In order to achieve these objectives, they emphasised on planned, state-driven rapid socio-economic development along modern, scientific lines. Further, the vision of the national leaders on socio-economic development was quite radical and way ahead of its times. The removal of poverty' emerged as the second most important objective after the overthrow of the British rule. Moreover, the leaders such as Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose succeeded in giving the national movement a decidedly socialist-tinge and socio-economic equality emerged as yet another significant goal. In fact, the nationalists adopted an increasingly radical programme of socio- economic reform. As early as 1931, at its Karachi Session, the INC adopted a Resolution on Fundamental Rights and National Economic Programme (also known as Karachi Declaration). The declaration on fundamental rights guaranteed basic civil rights of free speech, free press, free assembly and freedom of association, equality before the law irrespective of caste, creed or sex, neutrality of the state in regard to all religions, elections on the basis of universal adult franchise, and free and compulsory primary education. Additionally, the resolution on National Economic Programme promised substantial reduction in rent and revenue, relief from agricultural indebtedness and control of usury, better conditions for workers such as living wage, limited hours of work and protection of women workers, the right to organise and form union to workers and peasants, and state ownership or control of key industries, mines and means of transport. It also laid down that the culture, language and script of the minorities shall be protected. Henceforth, the Karachi Declaration formed the basic document of the nation's socio-economic program for later years. "The land belongs to those who work on it and to no one else." -Gandhi in 1942 Commitment to Egalitarian Society Among the socio-economic goals, of special significance for the nationalists was the upliftment of the most oppressed classes of Indian society that included the poor, the minorities, the women and the lower castes. Gandhi played the most significant role in involving women in the national movement. He believed that- 'a woman is a companion of man, gifted with equal mental capacities and she has an equal right to freedom and liberty as he.' He also believed that women were better suited for Satyagraha protest as they had the right qualities needed for a non-violent struggle. Consequently, what we saw was a massive participation of women in the national movement. The women participated in the Salt March in large numbers, they promoted hand spun khadi and picketed shops selling liquor and foreign goods. They organised Prabhat Pheris and also provided food and shelter to many political activists who had gone underground. The participation of women in the national movement helped in breaking down several old barriers and became the single biggest factor in transforming the role and status of women in Indian society. Led by Gandhi, the national movement also laid special emphasis on removal of caste inequalities and abolition of untouchability. It is a legacy of the national movement that the constitution of India accords Right to Equality as a Fundamental Right to all its citizens and includes equality before law; prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, gender or place of birth; equality of opportunity in matters of employment; abolition of untouchability and abolition of titles. Faith in Secularism From the very beginning the national leaders were committed to the ideal of secularism. Secularism itself was defined in a broad sense to include separation of religion from the state, neutrality of state with regard to all religions, equal respect towards all religions, treatment of religion as a private matter for the individual, absence of discrimination based on religion and opposition to communalism. Commitment to secularism was clearly worded in the 1931 Karachi Declaration on Fundamental Rights. True, Gandhi was a deeply religious person who initially held that religion, the basis of morality, must pervade all realms of a person's life and was, hence, inseparable from politics. But when he saw that the communalists were using religion to ignite passions and divide the countrymen, he himself moved the Karachi resolution and overtly began to preach the separation of religion from politics. In 1942, he declared, "Religion is the personal affair of each individual. It must not be mixed up with politics or national affairs." Jawaharlal Nehru also vehemently opposed communalism and was quick to recognise it as the Indian form of fascism. True, the national leaders failed to devise a long term strategy to combat the communal forces and the country was finally partitioned amidst communal carnage. But despite the trauma and bloodshed, the Indian leaders continued to repose their faith in the ideal of secularism and enshrined it as a basic feature in the Indian constitution. Vision of a United India from its early days, the national movement was committed to the cause of welding India into one nation. As early as 1885, the INC was formed as an all-India body to put up a united front against a common enemy, i.e., the British rule. India had begun to enter the process of becoming a nation, and the first major objective of the founders of Indian National Congress was to weld India into one nation. In its very first meeting, the aims and objectives of the organisation put forth included promotion of friendship among the countrymen; eradication of all possible prejudices relating to race, creed or province and consolidation of sentiments of national unity. While the national leaders acknowledged the role of the British in uniting India politically and administratively, they were simultaneously aware of the divisive policies which they actively countered. To the national leaders, the regional-cultural identities did not appear as an obstacle in the emergence of a national identity, but as an integral part of it. Overtime, this vision gave birth to dual concepts of unity in diversity and national integration which again found firm place in the Indian constitution. Internationalism and Independent Foreign Policy India's foreign policy after Independence was also rooted in the international outlook of the nationalists that had evolved overtime and was essentially based on opposition to colonialism and support to the colonised people all over the world. During World War II, the nationalists had adopted a strong anti-imperialist and anti-fascist stand. It was clearly reflected in the presidential address of Jawaharlal Nehru (Lucknow Session, 1936) when he stated, "We see the world divided up into two vast groups today-the imperialist and fascist on one side, the socialist and nationalist on the other... Inevitably we take our stand with the progressive forces of the world which are ranged against imperialism and fascism". Most remarkably, though India was itself engaged in a life and death struggle against imperialism and racism, its leaders took care never to take recourse to reverse racism and to avoid hatred towards the British at all times. Thus, Indian nationalism never crossed, the line and largely succeeded in maintaining a safe distance from chauvinism or jingoism. High Norms of Politics and Political Behavior The national movement also bequeathed to independent India the high norms of politics and political behaviour. The national leaders including Dadabhai Naoroji, Surendranath Banerjee, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, Lala Lajpat Rai, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Aurobindo Ghose, Bhagat Singh, Chandrashekhar Azad, Sardar Patel, Subhas Chandra Bose, Jawaharlal Nehru, Acharya Narendra Dev, Jayaprakash Narayan, Mahatma Gandhi and others were ideologues and moralists of the highest order. It was owing to their dedication and sincerity of purpose for India's emancipation that they were able to stir vast masses of Indian people into political action. It held true for the political cadres who readily gave up their jobs and comfort of family life to dedicate themselves full time for the cause of the nation. Yet another legacy of the national movement was the tradition of accommodative politics. The movement was able to unite varied people into one force through a painstaking process of compromise, accommodation and reconciliation of different points of view. This was an invaluable legacy for a young nation that now faced the enormous challenge of keeping itself united even after the common enemy was gone, without giving way to endless bickering and chaos. Capacity to Change with Changing Times The national movement also showed the remarkable capacity to change and renovate as per the need of the changing times. Its programme and policies underwent continuous change as is manifest in the transition from the phase of moderate politics to that of the extremists and finally to that of mass mobilisation under Mahatma Gandhi. The movement took a step forward and sometimes even backtracked as per the changing policy of the colonial rulers. It therefore stood for dynamism and innovation in many ways and led behind yet another invaluable legacy for the young nation. In the end, it may be said that the national movement and its leaders left behind a rich legacy of values, ideals and vision for socio-economic development of the nation. Young India, on its part, has largely remained loyal to the legacy left behind by its founding fathers and many of the values and ideals discussed above have been enshrined in the Constitution of free India. However, it must be remembered that no legacy, however rich, can last forever. Since Independence, many weaknesses have surfaced from time to time and it is upto the new generation to draw upon its lessons well. For isn't it rightly said, 'Learn from history or you are doomed to repeat it!" 


   On 15th August 1947, though the struggle for independence was over, it marked the beginning of a new struggle, a struggle to survive as an independent nation, realise the promises of freedom and establish a modern democracy. The need of the hour, thus, was to lay down the basic framework of governance upon which the superstructure of a new nation was to be built. Hence, one of the foremost tasks taken up by independent India was the making of the new constitution. MAKING OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION Modern democracies are based on the theory of constitutional government meaning a government which derives its authority from the people and the supreme law of the land. The Constitution simply means a body of fundamental principles or established precedents according to which a state or other organisation is acknowledged to be governed. It defines the powers of the main organs of the state, demarcates their responsibilities and regulates their relationships with each other and with the people. It also describes the form of government and reflects people's faith and aspirations. Precursor to Indian Constitution (Government of India Act of 1935) The Government of India Act 1935 was the precursor to Indian Constitution. The Indian Independence Act, 1947 held that until a new Constitution came into force, the 1935 Act would be the constitutional law of India. Certain features of the 1935 Act, with modifications though, were later incorporated in the Constitution of India. These include a federal structure in the form of a Union government and State governments and the division of powers between them (Union List, State List and Concurrent List), Bicameral legislature (the Lower House and the Upper House i.e., Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha at the Union level; and State Legislative Assembly and State Legislative Council, at the State level) and the Federal Court (the Supreme Court). ASSEM EONSTITUENT Constituent Assembly The Constituent Assembly is a body of people that frames the fundamental laws of a country. The Constitution of India was framed by a constituent assembly set up under the Cabinet Mission Plan Fig. 2.1 Seal of the Constituent of 1946. INDIA Assembly of India FORMATION OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY: TIMELINE 1934: The idea for a Constituent Assembly of India was first put forward by M.N. Roy, a pioneer of the communist movement in India. 1935: It became an official demand of the Indian National Congress. 1939: C. Rajagopalachari voiced the demand for a Constituent Assembly based on adult franchise. 8th August 1940: The demand was accepted by the British in the August Offer of Viceroy Linlithgow. 1946: Elections to the Constituent Assembly were held for the first time. Role of Cabinet Mission Plan The idea of a Constituent Assembly was alien to British imperial practice and was accepted by the British on the demand of the Indian National Congress. The Cabinet Mission Plan (that was sent to India in March 1946 to frame a scheme for making a constitution for India) had recommended for a Constituent Assembly comprising of representatives of all major parties. The Cabinet Mission thought that, though the ideal way to form it would be through election on the basis of adult suffrage, there was no time left for that. Earlier that year in January, General Elections 1945-46 were held and provincial legislatures had been elected on the basis of a limited franchise and communal electorates. The Cabinet Mission proposed that the Constituent Assembly be elected by those provincial assemblies. Hence, the Constituent Assembly of India was constituted under the Cabinet Mission Plan on 6"h December 1946 to draft a constitution for India. Composition of the Constituent Assembly The members of the assembly were elected indirectly by members of the newly elected provincial assemblies. The Assembly was not elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage, and Muslims and Sikhs received special representation as minorities. The total membership of the Constituent Assembly founded for undivided India was 385, reduced to 298 (including nine women) after the partition. The members represented various political parties such as the Congress Party, Communist Party of India, Praja Party, Krishak Praja Party, Scheduled Castes Federation, Unionist Muslims and the Muslim League. In addition to these, independent members and representatives from the Governor's Provinces and the Princely States were also represented. Congress Dominance In the Assembly, the Congress enjoyed an overwhelming majority. But the party itself included a wide diversity of opinions-from radical Marxists to Hindu revivalists-all of whom participated in the process. The party also adopted a non-sectarian approach and freely recruited the best available talent, nominating several members from outside the party's fold. For instance, the Congress nominated two Hindu Mahasabha leaders, two Socialists and two Forward Block members in the Constituent Assembly. Boycott by Muslim League The Muslim League had rejected the Cabinet Mission Plan as the Plan had rejected the demand for a full-fledged Pakistan. Thus, the League boycotted the Constituent Assembly and joined it only after the decision to partition British India was taken. When this happened on 14 July 1947, only 23 Muslim Leaguers arrived at the Constituent Assembly of India. The others went to the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan. Leaders of the Constituent Assembly The leaders of the Assembly comprised of both political and technical leaders. Given the predominance of the Congress party in the Assembly, the political leadership naturally vested in its leaders. The top leadership comprised of Jawaharlal Nehru, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and Dr. Rajendra Prasad or Nehru-Patel-Azad-Prasad, termed as 'the oligarchy' by Granville Austin. Nehru set a formidable example by showing a keen interest in every aspect of constitution making. Patel's interest was only next to Nehru's. Azad enriched many issues of importance with his scholarly and philosophical mind. Prasad earned accolades for maintaining impartiality and dignity of his office (office of the President of the Assembly). Outside the party, the leadership comprised of legal luminaries including the likes of B.R. Ambedkar, K.M. Panikkar, and Pandit Hriday Nath Kunjru (who was not a member of the Constituent Assembly). Granville Austin, chronicler of the history of constitution-making in India had stated, "The Constitution Assembly was a one-party body in an essentially one- party country...one might assume, aware of the character of monolithic political systems in other countries, that a mass party in India would be rigid and narrow in outlook and that its powerful leadership would silence dissent and confine policy and decision-making to the hands of the select few. In India, the reverse was the case. The membership of the Congress in the constituent Assembly and outside held social, economic and political views ranging from the reactionary to the revolutionary, and it did not hesitate to voice them." Status of the Constituent Assembly The Constituent Assembly was constituted under the Cabinet Mission Plan, not as a sovereign body. Viceroy Lord Wavell had intended to appoint the provisional president and issue invitations to the members to attend the first session in his own name. However, Nehru was intent on maintaining the autonomy of the Constituent Assembly of India, which was a brain-child of the national movement and not the British. Nehru, therefore, ensured that the senior-most member in terms of age became the Provisional president and invitations went out in the name of the Secretary of the Assembly. It may further be stated that the Assembly was expected to draft a constitution for India to be enacted by the British government. The Indian Independence Act 1947 had authorised the Governor-General of India to give assent to the Constitution. However, with the independence of India on 15h August 1947, the Constituent Assembly emerged as a sovereign body and also doubled up as the legislature of the new state. The Assembly later got the Constitution authenticated by its own chairman, as a final assertion of the sovereign authority of the Constituent Assembly. Fig. 2.2 Jawaharlal Nehru and other members taking pledge during the midnight session of the Constituent Assembly of India held on 14th and 15th August 1947. Work of the Constituent Assembly Drafting the Indian Constitution was no easy task. The Constitution had to live up to the aspirations of the people who had been exposed to several centuries of injustice, social exploitation and discrimination, as well as two centuries of colonial dominance. Moreover, it had to be applicable and acceptable to people belonging to diverse religious, political and regional sections. However, once the transfer of power was effected, the work of the Constituent Assembly progressed steadily and smoothly in an atmosphere of order and freedom. The Assembly conducted its business in a real democratic manner- discussions were encouraged, great tolerance was shown towards criticism and no attempt was made to rush through. The motto with which the constitution-making exercise was undertaken was 'consensus', rather than the 'majority principle'. The Constituent Assembly appointed a total of 22 committees to deal with different tasks of constitution- making. Out of these, eight major committees and their chairmen were as follows: Major Committees of the Constituent Assembly S. No. Committee Headed by Drafting Committee Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Union Powers Committee Jawaharlal Nehru Union Constitution Committee Jawaharlal Nehru Provincial Constitution Committee Sardar Vallabhai Patel Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minori- Sardar Vallabhai Patel ties and Tribal and Excluded Areas Rules of Procedure Committtee Dr. Rajendra Prasad States Committee (Committee for Negotiating with Jawaharlal Nehru States) Steering Committee Dr. Rajendra Prasad WORK OF THE CONSTITUIENT ASSEMBLY- TIMELINE 9h December 1946: The first meeting of the Constituent Assembly was held in the constitution hall (now the Central Hall of Parliament House) in an atmosphere of uncertainty due to the absence of the Muslim League members who boycotted the meeting over the demand for Pakistan. Yet, the Assembly made substantial progress and appointed the oldest member of the Assembly Sachchidananda Sinha as its first interim two-day President in accordance with French practice. 11h December 1946: The Assembly elected Dr. Rajendra Prasad as its permanent President. Harendra Coomar Mookerjee was elected as Vice President (he later became the first Governor of Bengal after India became a republic). Jurist B.N. Rao was appointed Constitutional Advisor to the Assembly (he later presented the First draft of the Constitution. A detailed draft was later presented by B.R. Ambedkar, Chairman of the Drafting Committee). 13th December 1946: Jawaharlal Nehru moved his famous Objectives Resolution' which declared the Assembly's firm resolve for an 'independent Sovereign Republic' and later became the Preamble of the Constitution. 22nd July 1947: The National flag was adopted. 15" August 1947: India gained independence as the Dominion of India. 29th August 1947: Drafting Committee appointed with Dr. B. R. Ambedkar as the Chairman. 16th July 1948: Along with H.C. Mookerjee, V.T. Krishnamachari was also elected as second Vice-President of Constituent Assembly. 26h November 1949: Constitution passed, adopted and enacted by the Assembly and authenticated by the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, Dr Rajendra Prasad. Certain provisions relating to citizenship, elections, provisional parliament and transitional provisions came into force on 26 November 1949 itself while the major part of the constitution came into force on 26 January 1950. 24th January 1950: 'Jana Gana Mana' adopted as the national anthem, and the first two verses of 'Vande Mataram' the national song. Rajendra Prasad elected the first President of India. The Assembly was chaired by Dr. Rajendra Prasad when it met as a constitu- ent body, and was chaired by G. V. Mavlankar when It completed the task of drafting a constitution in two years, 11 months and 18 days. Meanwhile, 554 princely states merged with the Republic of India. met as a legislative body. On 26h January 1950, the Constitution of India came into force and repealed the Government of India Act 1935 (as the chief governing document of the country). It also repealed the Indian Independence Ac: and thus India ceased to be a dominion of the British Crown and became a sovereign democratic republic. The date of 26 January was chosen to commemorate the Purna Swaraj declaration of independence of 1930. We continue to celebrate this day as the Republic Day. It is, indeed, creditable that the Members of the Constituent Assembly completed the task of finalising a Constitution within a period of three years even as it took many more years for other countries to have their first Constitution. It again goes to the credit of the constitution makers and their broad vision that the Constitution of India was never abrogated, and a new one introduced. The Indian Constitution was never seriously questioned since the time it came into force. The changing requirements were attended to through effecting amendments to the Constitution while its essential features were retained; they occasionally came under strain, though. Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, chairman of the Drafting Committee, presenting the final draft of the Indian Constitution to Dr. Rajendra Prasad on 25h Fig. 2.3 November 1949. India and the Commonwealth A striking decision taken by independent India at this time was to agree to remain a full member of the British Commonwealth of Nations. There were several reasons for this decision. Firstly, the Commonwealth was simply meant to be a free association of independent members and India could leave it any time it liked. No decision or treaty of a member of the Commonwealth would be binding on India without its express consent. Thus, membership to the Commonwealth did not come in the way of its sovereign republican character in any way. Significantly, Britain also declared that the British citizens in future were to be described as 'Commonwealth Citizens' (British Nationality Act 1949). Secondly, there were practical considerations as well. For instance, India and Britain shared deep seated ties in ideas and institutions. India had significant economic ties with Britain and membership to the Commonwealth would have also meant continuation of preferential tarifl's. There were also many Indians who had settled in Commonwealth countries. Thus, past associations, common political faith, economic interests and fear of isolation were some of the main reasons which induced India to remain in the commonwealth. Though India recognised the British monarch as the head of the Commonwealth, it did not create any allegiance of the Indians to the British monarch. The Constitution of India did not even make a mention of India's commonwealth membership. Clearly, the membership had no legal sanction behind it and could be dropped any time as easily as it had been declared. CONSTITUTION OF INDIA CONSTITUTION OF INDIA Fig. 2.4 The original Constitution of India is hand-written with beautiful calligraphy, done by Prem Behari Narain Raizda. Each page is beautified and illustrated by artists from Shantiniketan including Nandalal Bose and Beohar Rammanohar Sinha. The illustrations in the document represent styles from different civilisations of the subcontinent ranging from the Indus Valley to the present times. The original book is kept in a special helium-filled case in the Library of the Parliament of India. The Constituent Assembly finalised the Constitution of India on 26th November 1949 and it came into force on 26th January 1950. It is universally acclaimed for its liberal and democratic spirits which reflects the progressive outlook and idealism of its founders. It is the supreme law of India. It enshrines the will of the people of the country and sets the broad functional parameters of governance. It imparts constitutional supremacy and not parliamentary supremacy as it was created by a Constituent Assembly and not by the Parliament. Hence, Parliament cannot override the constitution. The Constitution essentially provides a framework for a democratic and parliamentary form of government. The commitment of many nationalists to socialism is also reflected in the constitution which has a socialist tilt. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar is widely considered as its chief architect and known as the 'Father of the Indian Constitution'. The Constitution of India is the biggest written constitution the world. It is an elaborate and bulky document, originally containing 395 Articles arranged in twenty two Parts and eight Schedules. Since then, several amendments have been made from time to time. Salient Features of the Constitution Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic, Republic The Preamble of the constitution declares India as a 'Sovercign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic, Republic'. Sovereignty means absolute independence i.e., a government which is not controlled by any other power, internal or external. The entire freedom struggle aimed at the attainment of this quintessential principle of sovereignty. The sovereignty in India rests with the people and is exercised through the institutions that have been created for the purpose. The words Socialist' and 'Secular' were not there in the original Preamble but were added by the 42nd Amendment. Socialism means commitment to ideals like removal of inequalities, provision of minimum basic necessities to al, equal pay for equal work, etc. Secularism in Indian context implies several things including absence of any state-religion, separation of religion from the state, neutrality of state with regard to all religions, equal respect towards all religions, treatment of religion as a private matter for the individual, freedom of religion and absence of discrimination based on religion. Democracy is simply defined as government of the people, by the people and for the people. It essentially means that the government is elected by the people and is accountable to them. Democracy in India is achieved through various principles including universal adult franchise, system of elections, fundamental rights, etc. Republic means a state with an elected head of the state as opposed to a monarch or a hereditary ruler. Universal Adult Franchise As an ultimate success of democratic rule, the Constitution of India provides for universal adult franchise. The constitution makers showed immense faith in the common man and adopted the principle of adult suffrage in a largely poor and illiterate society. Granville Austin, has described direct elections by adult suffrage like a 'gong, the single note, whose reverberations might awaken- or at least stir- sleeping India'. The extent of advance made by the constitution may be appreciated when we recall that till the end of British rule, franchise remained immensely restricted by property, education and other qualifications to just about 15% of the country's population. Union of States Notably, India is constituted as a *union of States' and not a 'federation of States'. The Drafting Committee had clarified that though India was to be a federation, the federation was not the result of an agreement by the States to join in a federation, and that the federation not being the result of an agreement, no state has the right to secede from it. The federation is a union because it is indestructible. Hence the constitution odes use the term 'federal state' anywhere. The decision of the constitution makers to go for a strong Union Government (Centre) within a federal framework was also influenced by the circumstances in which it was taken. The Union Powers Committee headed by Nehru, had initially provided for a very weak Central Government. But once the 3rd June Plan was announced and the decision on partition was taken, it quickly moved in the direction of a federation with a strong Center. Hence, India's Constitution has both unitary (centralising) and federal (de-centralising) features. Unitary features present include strong center, single citizenship and single unified judiciary. Federal features include distribution of powers between the Union Government and the States and presence of three lists of subjects (the Union List, the State List and the Concurrent List). Hence, the Indian constitution does not fit into any rigid definition of federal or unitary and is also sometimes termed as 'quasi-federal'. Moreover, Indian federalism has certain distinctive features. For instance, the federalism is asymmetric i.e., the devolved powers to all the states are not uniform. Jammu and Kashmir has been awarded higher degree of autonomy; the Union Territories are directly governed by the Union government; and Delhi and Puducherry have been accorded their own legislatures. Hence, the system introduced by the constitution is also sometimes termed as 'cooperative federalism'. Relative Flexibility This feature refers to the amenability of the constitution. The writers of Indian constitution were of the view that a Constitution is a living document and, hence, it has to reflect the changing times. In fact, the occasion for debate regarding the basic features of the Constitution arose when certain amendments were made to the Constitution. Thus, the Constitution of India is not rigid unlike that in some other countries and provides room for amendment. The amendment procedure laid down in the Constitution is both rigid and soft for different articles. The supremacy of the Indian Parliament vis--vis the Constitution and the Supreme Court has often been a matter of controversy. It was, in the final analysis, resolved that Parliament is rightfully authorised to amend the constitution, but only so long as it did not amend the 'basic features of the Constitution. Besides, the Supreme Court has the power to decide whether an amendment to the Constitution, indeed, were against the basic features of the Constitution or not. Written Constitution The Constitution of India is a written document unlike the British constitution which is unwritten. It is also the lengthiest constitution in the world. The original constitution had 395 Articles and eight Schedules, while, the constitution of USA has only seven Articles. Main Provisions The Constitution of India was not an original document and the framers of the Constitution freely borrowed the good features of other constitutions particularly those of the UK, the USA, Canada and Ireland. The Preamble of the Constitution is an introduction or preface to the constitution. It contains the guiding principles, the philosophy, the spirit or the essence of the constitution. The very first words clearly indicate the source from which the document derives its authority, i.e. 'We, the people of India'. It also establishes the objectives of the constitution and is based on the 'Objectives Resolution' drafted and moved by Jawaharlal Nehru in the Constituent Assembly on 13th December 1946. As is clear from the text of the Preamble, the sovereign authority in India is vested in the people. Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity are the principle objectives of the constitution. The parts on Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy contain elaborate provisions to give shape to these objectives. The ordering of these objectives also indicates the priority given to socio-economic justice which was perhaps considered the most fundamental aspect of the constitution. Is Preamble a Part of the Constitution? Whether the Preamble is a part of the constitution or not has been a matter of controversy. In the Berubari Case (1960), the Supreme Court originally stated that the preamble is not an integral part of the Constitution and therefore it is not enforceable in a court of law. However, in the Kesavananda Case (1973), the Supreme Court overruled the earlier decision and upheld that the Preamble was an integral part of the Constitution and may be used to interpret ambiguous areas of the document. (Institutions of Governance and thelr Worklng) Union Government The three organs or branches of any government include legislature, executive and judiciary. The Union Executive In India, the legislature and the executive are drawn from one another, while the judiciary is an independent body. The Union Executive consists of the President, the Vice-President and the Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at its head.  The President- The executive power of the Union is vested in the President and is exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with the Constitution. Hence, all activities of the state are carried out in the name of the President. His position is comparable to that of the King under the British constitution- He is head of the state but not of the executive; he represents but not rules the nation. He is elected by an electoral college consisting of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the legislative assemblies of the States in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. The Office of the President, manner of election and re-election, term of office, qualifications for election, impeachment, etc. are enunciated in Articles 52 to 62. As in the United States, in India, too, the President is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. The President summons both the houses of Parliament and addresses its joint sessions. He appoints all the important functionaries of the state such as the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers, Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts, the Attorney General, Governors of States, Chairpersons of Commissions like the Election Commission of India and heads of organisations like the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG). He has the power to grant pardons, etc. and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases. Though normally a figurehead, unstable or ambiguous political situations may provide ample opportunity to the President to use presidential discretion leading to potential abuse of powers. For instance, President's activism with regard to the dismissal of state governments and imposition of President's rule has evoked much controversy in the past.  The Vice President- He is the ex-officio Chairman of the Council of States. The Vice-President acts as President or to discharge his functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence, of President. Articles 63 to 70 deal with the office of the Vice-President, tenure, method of election etc. There were two occasions when Presidents, Dr. Zakir Hussain and Fakhruddin Ahmed died in office and Vice Presidents V.V. Giri and B.D. Jatti had to step in.  The Council of Ministers- The Constitution states that there shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions. It further states that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the ndvice of the Prime Minister. The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People,:  The Prime Minister- In practice, the President appoints as Prime Minister the leader of the party that has a majority in the Lok Sabha or, if no party has a clear majority, a person who can prove the confidence of the majority of the members of the Lok Sabha. Other Ministers are chosen by the Prime Minister 'and appointed by the President. Even those persons who are not Members of Parliament may be appointed as ministers, on the condition that they become a member of either house of Parliament within six months. In this way, almost all powers formally vested in the President are in reality exercised by the Prime Minister. Thus, the real executive power under the constitution vests in the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is the head of Government and he presides over the meetings of the Union Council of Ministers which is collectively responsible to the House of the People. The Union Legislature (Parliament) After Independence, India chose to adopt a parliamentary form of government. In such a form of government, the President is the Head of the State while real executive power is exercised by the head of the Government, i.e., the Prime Minister, in association with his Council of Ministers, all of who are collectively responsible to the Parliament. Thus, the legislature of the Union is known as the Parliament (Article 79) which consists of the President and two Houses, known respectively as the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) and the House of the People (Lok Sabha). The main function of the Parliament is to make laws for the country and to find finances for the running of the Government. In fact, the Parliament is the highest law-making body in the country and it alone has the power to amend the constitution including Fundamental Rights. Clearly, the constitution had envisaged the Parliament as an institution commanding great power and prestige. However, in recent years, it is seen that some members indulge in unnecessary shouting, walkouts and even physical scuffles, lowering the dignity of the Parliament and delaying legislation work. Questions have been raised on the productivity of Parliament sessions at the cost of taxpayers' money. Another matter of concern is the persistent demand for reservation for various sections of people in parliament, notwithstanding the fact that the constitution itself had envisaged reservations as a short-term measure lasting ten years. The practice of reservations has shown that once the principle is accepted, it is not only impossible to reverse and also encourages other groups to claim similar benefits, thus perpetuating group-identities. However, the current political scenario is such that even questioning the desirability of reservations has become difficult. The Judiciary The third organ of the government is the Judiciary. Constitutional Articles 124-147 and 214-237 lay down the entire framework of the judicial system in India. Accordingly, India has a single unified judicial system which stands like a pyramid with the lower courts as the base, High Courts in the middle and the Supreme Court at the top. Prior to the establishment of Supreme Court of India in January 1950, the highest court of appeal was the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Britain (abolished in October 1949). The Constitution states that there shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than seven (now 30) other Judges. The Supreme Court of India is the highest judicial forum of India, it is the final court of appeal and is the custodian of the Constitution. Laws enacted legislature can be declared void by the Supreme Court, if it finds them in conflict with the provisions of the Constitution. This power is known as the power of 'judicial review' or 'constitutional review'. Besides, the Supreme Court has extensive original, appellate and advisory jurisdictions. the Government in the States and Union Territories The system of government in the States closely resembles that of the Union. The State Executive consists of the Governor assisted by a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at its head. The Constitution states that the Governor of a State shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. The Governor shall hold office during the pleasure of the President. The term of office of the Governor is five years. No person shall be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has complcted the age of thirty-five years. The Constitution further states that there shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is by or under this Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion. The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor. The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State. Thus, like the President, the Governor is meant to be a constitutional head. However, in case of failure of constitutional machinery in state and imposition of the President's rule (under Article 356), the governor assumes real powers and emerges as the effective executive. Over the years, this power of the Governor has also evoked much controversy. All political parties are guilty of appointing pliant governors (as opposed to non-partisan 'outsiders') who have tended to act more as agents of the Centre and even conspired in toppling state governments. The desirable convention of consulting the state Chief Minister before appointing the Governor has also been overlooked. The Union Territories, seven in number, are directly administered by lieutenant governors appointed by the President. Delhi and Puducherry are two union territories with their own legislatures. Local Government Though the constitution does not lay down the exact form of local government, the Directive Principles clearly instruct the state to 'take steps to organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government' (Article 40). Accordingly, the local government in India has evolved from Community Development Programme in the 1950s to three-tier Panchaynti Raj system constitutionalised by the 73 and 74th Amendments in 1993. Services under the Union and the States The Constitution also provides for various services under the union and the states and setting up of Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States (Part XIV). Rules for recruitment and conditions of service including constitutional guarantees against arbitrary dismissal have also been laid down. Thus, the colonial structure of administration (including all-India services, state services and central services) was retained; the Indian Civil Service was replaced by the Indian Administrative Service. But why did free-India retain the steel frame of British administration? Perhaps the main reason lies in the chaos accompanying freedom and partition. The ambiguous position of princely states, the communal riots, the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi... all seemed to push India to the very edge of disintegration. Amidst such confusion, the one factor of stability and predictability appeared to be the administrative structure. "Basic Structure' of the Constitution The Constitution is supposed to have a 'basic structure' which cannot be altered. This was spelt out by the Supreme Court in the majority judgement in the Kesavananda Bharati case (1973). According to the judgement, there are certain basic features of the Indian Constitution which cannot be amended. If an amendment seeks to alter this structure, the Court may declare it as ultra vires (beyond one's legal authority) as the word 'amend' in Article 368 means only changes other than altering the very structure of the Constitution, which be tantamount to making a new constitution. The power of the Parliament to amend the basic structure came into sharp focus at the time of Emergency. The present position is that the court can declare any amendment to the Constitution as ultra vires if it believes that it alters any basic feature of the constitution. The features included in the 'basic structure' of the Constitution are supremacy of the constitution; the republican and democratic form of government; secular character of the Constitution; separation of powers between the legislature, the executive and the judiciary; principle of free and fair elections; the rule of law; objectives specified in the Preamble; judicial review; freedom and dignity of the individual; unity and integrity of the nation; principle of equality; concept of social and economic justice; the balance between the Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles; the independence of judiciary and effective access to justice. While there are differences among judges regarding the contents of the above list, there is doctrine of 'basic structure' or 'basic features'. nsensus over the "CONCLUSION Over the years, voices have emanated from various corners regarding changes required to be made in the Constitution, leading to the appointment of the National Commission to: Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) by the BJP- led NDA government in 2000. Significantly, recommendations were sought without changing the 'basic structure' or 'basic features' of the constitution, amply demonstrating the extent to which the constitution has succeeded in commanding respect, even from its critics. Granville Austin- "India would do as she had done for centuries: take what she desired from other cultures and bend it to her needs." Bipan Chandra- "We cannot lay our failures at the door of the constitution; where there are failures, as indeed there are many, it is not the Constitution that has failed us, it is we who have failed the Constitution."  
